Data Link Properties

C:\Documents and Setlings\Rebecca\My Documents’ fF]

Bere yoo:

I Blan

9. Click OK.
Visual Studio adds the Connection to the Server Explorer.

10. Right-click the Connection in the Server Explorer, click Rename from
the context menu, and then rename the Connection Access nwind.


erver Explorer
2] |

et ee Data Connections

BBAccess nwind
{% BUNNY. pubs.dbo
+) & BUNNY. Northwind.dbo
=) oy Servers

&)-- (Gl bunry

Database References

In addition to Database Connections in the Server Explorer, Visual Studio also
supports Database References. Database References are set as part of a Database
Project, which is a special type of project used to store SQL scripts, Data Commands,
and Data Connections.

Database References are created in the Solution Explorer (rather than the Server
Explorer) and, unlike Database Connections defined in the Server Explorer, they are
stored along with the project.

Data connections defined through the Server Explorer become part of your Visual
Studio environment—they will persist as you open and close projects. Database
references, on the other hand, exist as part of a specific project and are only available
as part of the project.

Design time connections aren't automatically included in any project, but you can drag a
design time connection from the Server Explorer to a form, and Visual Studio will create
a pre-configured Connection object for you.


Add an Instance of a Design Time Connection to a Form
"Select the Access nwind Connection in the Server Explorer and drag it
onto the Connection Properties form.
Visual Studio adds a pre-configured OleDbConnection to the Component
Designer.

Fe Edt View Beet Bud Debog Date
Pi ee £e elo OG» be * i *"aoa8- =

Pe ComnecinanPsogention ri [Demage)* | 2 ot | Aika, apa - Corre am

1 P|
Gale, Larvae 1) peer
a Le

Fase
i eta

Pep emboe

*
i

Creating a Connection at Run Time

Using Visual Studio to create form-level Connections is by far the easiest method, but if
you need a Connection that isn't attached to a form, you can create one at run time in
code.

Note You wouldn't ordinarily create a form-level Connection object in
code because the Visual Studio designers are easier and just as
effective.

The Connection object provides two overloaded versions of its constructor, giving you
the option of passing in the ConnectionString, as shown in Table 2-1.

Table 2-1: Connection Constructors

Method Description

New() Creates a
Connection
with the

ConnectionSt
ring property
set to an
empty string

New(ConnectionString) Creates a
Connection
with the
ConnectionSt
ring property
specified

The ConnectionString is used by the Connection object to connect to the data source.

We'll explore it in detail in the next section of this chapter.

Create a Connection in Code

Visual Basic .NET

1. Display the code for the ConnectionProperties form by pressing F7.
2. Add the following lines after the Inherits statement:

3. Friend WithEvents SqiIDbConnection1 As New _
