Microsoft ADO .NET Step by Step
by Rebecca M. Riordan ISBN: 0735612366
Microsoft Press © 2002 (512 pages)

ADO.NET Learn to use the ADO.NET model to expand on data-bound Windows and
z Web Forms, as well as how XML and ADO.NET intermingle.

Table of Contents

Microsoft ADO.NET Step by Step

Introduction

Partl - Getting Started with ADO.NET

Chapter 1 - Getting Started with ADO.NET

Partll - Data Providers

Chapter 2 - Creating Connections

Chapter 3 - Data Commands and the DataReader

Chapter 4 - The DataAdapter

Chapter 5 - Transaction Processing in ADO.NET
Part Ill - Manipulating Data

Chapter 6 - The DataSet

Chapter 7 - The DataTable

Chapter 8 - The DataView

Part IV - Using the ADO.NET Objects

Chapter 9 - Editing and Updating Data

Chapter 10 - ADO.NET Data-Binding in Windows Forms
Chapter 11 - Using ADO.NET in Windows Forms
Chapter 12 - Data-Binding in Web Forms
Chapter 13 - Using ADO.NET in Web Forms

Part V - ADO.NET and XML

Chapter 14 - Using the XML Designer

Chapter 15 - Reading and Writing XML

Chapter 16 - Using ADO in the .NET Framework
Index

List of Tables

List of Sidebars

Microsoft ADO.NET Step by Step

PUBLISHED BY

Microsoft Press

A Division of Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way

Redmond, Washington 98052-6399

Copyright © 2002 by Rebecca M. Riordan
All rights reserved. No part of the contents of this book may be reproduced or transmitted

in any form
or by any means without the written permission of the publisher.


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Riordan, Rebecca.

Microsoft ADO.NET Step by Step / Rebecca M. Riordan.

p. cm.

Includes index.

ISBN 0-7356-1236-6

1. Database design. 2. Object oriented programming (Computer
science) 3. ActiveX. I.

Title.

QA76.9.D26 R56 2002
005.75'85—dce21 2001054641

Printed and bound in the United States of America.
123456789 QWE 765432
Distributed in Canada by Penguin Books Canada Limited.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Microsoft Press books are available through booksellers and distributors worldwide. For
further information about international editions, contact your local Microsoft Corporation
office or contact Microsoft Press International directly at fax (425) 936-7329. Visit our
Web site at www.microsoft.com/mspress. Send comments to mspinput@microsoft.com.

Activex, IntelliSense, Internet Explorer, Microsoft, Microsoft Press, the .NET logo, Visual
Basic, Visual C#, and Visual Studio are either registered trademarks or trademarks of
Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. Other product and
company names mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective owners.

The example companies, organizations, products, domain names, e-mail addresses,
logos, people, places, and events depicted herein are fictitious. No association with any
real company, organization, product, domain name, e-mail address, logo, person, place,
or event is intended or should be inferred.

Acquisitions Editor: Danielle Bird

Project Editor: Rebecca McKay

Body Part No. X08-05018

To my very dear friend, Stephen Jeffries

About the Author

Rebecca M. Riordan

With almost 20 years’ experience in software design, Rebecca M. Riordan has earned
an international reputation as an analyst, systems architect, and designer of database
and work -support systems.

She works as an independent consultant, providing systems design and consulting
expertise to an international client base. In 1998, she was awarded MVP status by
Microsoft in recognition of her work in Internet newsgroups. Microsoft ADO.NET Step by
Step is her third book for Microsoft Press.

Rebecca currently resides in New Mexico. She can be reached at

rebeccar@attglobal.net.

Introduction

Overview

ADO.NET is the data access component of Microsoft's new .NET Framework. Microsoft
bills ADO.NET as “an evolutionary improvement” over previous versions of ADO, a claim
that has been hotly debated since its announcement. It is certainly true that the
ADO.NET object model bears very little relationship to earlier versions of ADO.


In fact, whether you decide to love it or hate it, one fact about the .NET Framework
seems undeniable: it levels the playing ground. Whether you’ve been at this computer
game longer than you care to talk about or you’re still sorting out your heaps and stacks,
learning the .NET Framework will require a major investment. We’re al/ beginners now.
So welcome to Microsoft ADO.NET Step by Step. Through the exercises in this book, |
will introduce you to the ADO.NET object model, and you'll learn how to use that model
in developing data-bound Windows Forms and Web Forms. In later topics, we'll look at
how ADO.NET interacts with XML and how to access older versions of ADO from the
-NET environment.

Since we’re all beginners, an exhaustive treatment would be, well, exhausting, so this
book is necessarily limited in scope. My goal is to provide you with an understanding of
the ADO.NET objects—what they are and how they work together. So fair warning: this
book will not make you an expert in ADO.NET. (How | wish it were that simple!)

What this book will give you is a road map, a fundamental understanding of the
environment, from which you will be able to build expertise. You'll know what you need to
do to start building data applications. The rest will come with time and experience. This
book is a place to start.

Although I’ve pointed out language differences where they might be confusing, in order
to keep the book within manageable proportions I’ve assumed that you are already
familiar with Visual Basic .NET or Visual C# .NET. If you’re completely new to the .NET
environment, you might want to start with Microsoft Visual Basic .NET Step by Step by
Michael Halvorson (Microsoft Press, 2002) or Microsoft Visual C# .NET Step by Step by
John Sharp and Jon Jagger (Microsoft Press, 2002), depending on your language of
choice.

The exercises that include programming are provided in both Microsoft Visual Basic and
Microsoft C#. The two versions are identical (except for the difference between the
languages), so simply choose the exercise in the language of your choice and skip the
other version.

Conventions and Features in This Book

You'll save time by understanding, before you start the lessons, how this book displays
instructions, keys to press, and so on. In addition, the book provides helpful features that
you might want to use.

" Numbered lists of steps (1, 2, and so on) indicate hands-on exercises. A
rounded bullet indicates an exercise that has only one step.

" Text that you are to type appears in bold.

" Terms are displayed in italic the first time they are defined.

" A plus sign (+) between two key names means that you must press those

keys at the same time. For example, “Press Alt+Tab” means that you hold down
the Alt key while you press Tab.

" Notes labeled “tip” provide additional information or alternative methods for a
step.

" Notes labeled “important” alert you to essential information that you should
check before continuing with the lesson.

" Notes labeled “ADO” point out similarities and differences between ADO and
ADO.NET.

" Notes labeled “Roadmap” refer to places where topics are discussed in depth.

" You can learn special techniques, background information, or features related

to the information being discussed by reading the shaded sidebars that appear
throughout the lessons. These sidebars often highlight difficult terminology or
suggest future areas for exploration.

" You can get a quick reminder of how to perform the tasks you learned by
reading the Quick Reference at the end of a lesson.
